# 20 July 2018

## or, the problem of environment variables.

Currently the pathogen build Snakefiles [assume some environment variables are
available][pathogen env], usually for fetching data from our RethinkDB
database.  These are defined ad-hoc by people running the builds, often using
personal shell scripts with several `export` lines that they `source` in their
shell before running the build.

Automated builds on Travis CI define environment variables in the repository
configuration, and [each variable is automatically `export`ed in the shell at
the start of the job][travis env].

When run outside of a container, the Snakefile has direct access to these
environment variables and all works as expected.

The environment _inside_ of a container, however, does not inherit the outside
environment automatically.

To get the required environment variables passed into the container, Trevor
[added a couple lines][cli temp fix] to explicitly pass `RETHINK_HOST` and
`RETHINK_AUTH_KEY`.  I see this fix as temporary because it a) adds
pathogen-specific logic to the CLI (which is supposed to be pathogen-agnostic)
and b) necessitates new CLI releases whenever a pathogen build needs a new
environment variable.

The question is: what to do instead?

Our goals for behaviour:

1. We want to keep using environment variables as they are [best
   practice](https://12factor.net/config) and well-supported by Travis CI,
   Amazon EC2, Heroku, etc.

2. We want the same method for defining environment variables to work
   regardless of how the build is run (with `snakemake` directly or via
   `nextstrain build`).

3. We don't want to too-tightly couple the CLI with pathogen builds by
   requiring it to know what environment variables builds need.

Below I lay out the two realistic options I see and their consequences.  I
initially preferred the second option, but after further consideration prefer
the first instead.


### Option 1: `NEXTSTRAIN_*`

The simplest option is to establish the convention that all build environment
variable names should start with `NEXTSTRAIN_`.  The CLI would then explicitly
provide support for this by consulting the outside environment and passing in
any such variables into the container.

Pros: This adds no extra overhead for defining environment variables depending
on how the build is run (goal #2) and reduces the specific coupling of builds
with the CLI (goal #3).  It's very clear what environment variables are
intended for our builds because they share a prefix.

Cons: How environment variables get set is still left up to each individual
user.  There's not a standard way.


### Option 2: Environment directories (envdirs)

An option with a little more structure is baking in the use of environment
directories (via [envdir][]) into our Snakefiles.  An environment directory is
a directory containing a set of files where each filename defines the name of
an environment variable to set and the file contents become the value of that
environment variable.

Environment files (envfiles) are similar in concept but are single files that
contain several `NAME=value` lines.  These are similar to a shell script but
are not read by the shell itself (and do not contain `export` commands).

The Unix command `envdir` or the Python code `envdir.open()` can be used to
read an environment directory, so Snakefiles would add:

    import envdir
    envdir.open("env/")

The environment directory itself would not be checked into git and would be
explicitly ignored from version control.

Pros: There's a standard way to define environment variables that everyone can
use: creating files like `env/RETHINK_HOST` and `env/RETHINK_AUTH_KEY`.

Cons: Additional code (1-2 lines) is added to the top of the Snakefile, which
people seemed strongly opposed to previously.  Travis CI jobs would have to
write environment values provided via configuration into the environment
directory, like: `echo $RETHINK_HOST > env/RETHINK_HOST`.



[pathogen env]: https://github.com/nextstrain/zika#fauna--rethinkdb-credentials
[travis env]: https://travis-ci.com/nextstrain/zika/jobs/135480885#L427-L428
[cli temp fix]: https://github.com/nextstrain/cli/commit/53d6cd8dcfa93aaf9ba308867397ada77b9277fb
[envdir]: http://envdir.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
